/com/This is the only third mode responsory in this selection but its mood is very much in consonance with the season. It imparts an inalterable gentleness to the Lord’s sorrowful meditation on all he must suffer to redeem mankind. A responsory remarkable for its inspiration, line, expression and suppleness; it portrays one who suffers and in whom everything is at once sorrowful and alert./com/A simple narrative of some of the circumstances related to the Passion. It uses the ordinary formulas of mode 2, the least varied of modes for responsories. Notice, in the second part, the very humble and confident prayer of the good thief. It begins in a style hardly ornate but broadens out with a crescendo on the great ascent of in regnum./com/Another lament of the Lord, this time over his chosen vineyard, the people of Israel whom he dearly loved but treats him so dreadfully in return. (A theme akin to the « Improperia» of today’s liturgy Ego propter te… et tu …). The complaint, though always meek, shifts from tenderness to suggest a note of reproach on Quómodo. “How could you have come to this….” The melody clings increasingly to the upper register and then curves down in a heavy arch, expressing the Lord’s sorrow and extenuation. It repeats the same formulas in a more tormented way at the thought of the preference given to Barabbas./com/Once again a complaint, but directed now towards the Lord’s enemies. The gradual ascent of et ecce flagellátum illustrates the Lord’s anxiety at the thought of the cruel torments awaiting him./com/A celebrated responsory. It is merely a factual account of the death of Christ, but with Jesus’ cry on the Cross it attains a highly dramatic pitch. This is the great cry which wells forth from the heart of the Lord who is abandoned by everyone, even his Father. It is an appeal, almost reproachful, sorrowful and moving, with warm and loving stress. Notice the incomparable curve of inclináto cápite and the soft ascent of emisit spíritum, both of which connote death./com/The melody, at first entirely introspective, soft and sorrowful, shifts with grace from the low to the high register, from calm to animation and becomes gradually more pacified with a moving, soft, syllabic drop on super me: It is permeated with profound sadness at so much solitude and distress./com/Here, the lamentation of the Lord is almost a whisper, as long as he considers his own fate, but it becomes agitated when recalling the murderers and their intrigues./com/A nervous and animated account of the arrest. After the initial word Iesum, in stark relief, the somewhat tormented sound of princípibus sacerdótum and of senióres pópuli seems to stress the odious role of the religious leaders. After the mention of Peter, the tone becomes pacified, and the piece ends with a beautiful and unexpected modulation from the 6th to the 8th mode./com/The Lord continues to mourn his solitude, yet always with the same meekness and tenderness, without the slightest reproach. “Crying has beclouded my eyes.” Notice the distress conveyed in the elongátus est a me, and the gentleness of consolabátur me. Then, with the arch of si est dolor, comes an invitation to “behold and consider” his infinite sorrow and to decide if indeed there could be anything more sorrowful./com/